---
layout: page
title: "Chapter Five"
created: 2025-11-10
updated: 2025-11-14
version: 0.1.0
categories: tango
tags: hidden
---

<style>
  .new-sub-section {
    font-size: 1.3em;
  }
</style>

1. My honest reason to be in tango.
2. My first challenge to get over: beautiful talented women. 
3. ??

# Protecting My Tango

My first exposure to tango was an old video by a charismtic dancer called El Flaco Dani. El Flaco was in his seventies, he had a long longing face so full of wrinkles that his wrinkles were full of wrinkles. He was dancing a milonga with the young and beautiful Silvina Valz and I still remember the thought that ran through my mind: I can be in my seventies and dance like that with such beautiful women? I struggled with writing this chapter because I kept looking for the real reason that I started and stayed in tango and whatever I wrote down felt incencere, like I was trying to sensationalize and spiritualize my hobby. But in the end, I came to realize, I'm just as guilty as succumbing to my lizard brain as an actual lizard running after a fly. My fly is elegant and beautiful women that have dedicated a big part of their time to their art. I relish in the idea of being in an embrace with them and having a good time. My struggle in admitting that stemmed from not wanting to be vain. But I was better off accepting it and acting it out otherwise I was doomed to be stuck in perpetual denial. I started this memoir saying that Unity and Friendship are what made me stick with tango. That was bullshit. In telling myself that story, I was simmply complicating Vonnegut's famous Girl-Meets-Boy story arc that we all experience at some point: Boy meets their dream girl, experiences momentary bliss, screws everything up, and then fights for redemption and wins. In my case, it was the same arc except multiply the screws-everything-up part by a big number. In a late night conversation with a good friend, my soulmate, she retiliated to my statement that women are always looking to change men by saying "no, we are improving you guys. Whenever I meet a guy and he says to me that's he's into pottery or poetry or cooking, I immediately know that he's had experience with women because he's a finer human being. No man in his right mind signs up for pottery classes on his own. There was a woman there." I disagreed profusely, but thinking about it later, I came to realize that in my vain persuit, I had built more character. I was more courageous, more humble, and more honest. As I wrote these words, I felt freed from my delusional shackles. I'm free to go out and just relish in the female beautiy and be around it. I don't have to camouflage my first reaction to El Flaco's video with more refined tales like I love the dance itself or I'm chasing after a mystical sensation that comes once every blue moon. Those things are true, but they're not my drive. That admission, gave me even more impulse to work harder on my dance to dance with more elegant and refined women and meet more challenges along the way. Once I became honest with myself I could suddenly see a multitude of gifts that tango had been giving me, but that I could not fully appreciate because of the internal confusion that unclarity brings. When I felt lonely, I could go to my neighborhood milonga and just hang there. When I felt like getting laid, I knew which milongas increased my chances of meeting someone with the same intentions. When I wanted to get inspired, I knew which milonga had top performers. When I wanted to listen to good music, I knew where the best bands played. When I wanted to impress, I knew which milonga had beginners. When I wanted to just dance, I knew which milonga had dancers compatible with me. When I got tired of tango, I knew that it would be there for me when I came back. The only thing that it demanded in return was to tell it exactly what it was that I wanted from it. But the gift that tango will give you no matter what you do and no matter who you are are deep and meaningful friendships. That one is for free.

Now that I was not figthing any internal conflict I was free to go directly towards my desire. If I had to dance with a thousand dancers that don't inspire me to get to the ones that do, then so be it. I am aware that my persuit could end in a revelation that it had no substance, that it was a waste of time, that it was shallow and does not make me happy, it could actually make me miserable, but it's a road that I'm willing to take because it is what excited me the most about tango.

---

What I found difficult with being more open and more honest about my intentions was not the act itself. I never found it hard to admit that I was an idiot or a coward or stubborn at certain things or certain periods in my life. The hard part was what series of events that admission could unleash. What challenges is it going to put in front of me? Is it going to mess up my present plans? Is it going to lead me to somewhere new outside of my map? My denial of my stupidity at times was the fear of what it meant to be smart more than trying not to seem stupid. In my tango, I felt like if I don't get over this sensationalist idea that my mind had built around beauty and skill that I will not get to a point where I could say that I'm honestly enjoying my own dancing for what it is. I will be constantly seeking the approval of beautiful talented women. That was something I was not willing to let diminish the enjoyment of my dance. I needed to start undoing all the damage that James Bond films have done to my brain. Whenever I saw a dancer that had an amazing flow and looked beautiful, I tensed up and created a million ways that I had to be better before I could even say hello to her. There was clear insecuirty there. I felt inadequate and I placed my complete worth in my dance. An error many dancers commit because the complexity of tango, not jsut the dance, but the couple dynamic could keep you feeling like inadequate for your whole interaction with it until you understand the fact that you're just not going jive with everybody. No matter where you reach or get to, a beginner  with misguided confidence could throw you off kilter. On the road to attaining tango confidence, you may not place any part of your worth in tango. You just have to wait until you get it until you start to identify with it as a source of something for your ego. I suspected that this sense of insecurity that I had came from the fact that a part of me started to automatically also evaluate its self worth from dancing because it was an activity that I was doing more and more of. I started to steer my journaling into exploring this and I started teaching myself to extract a sense of worth from different areas of my life. Most of it came from taking care of the people in my life, how I treat them, and how I take care of myself and of the aggregation of all the wins in my life. As I did so, my dance relaxed and confidence increased. As I worked more on that, all the negaitives of tango started becoming insignificant. I took my dance seriously and kept devoting the same amount of energy to it, but was careful to not let it define me. As I faced that head on, I started approaching these enigmatic and beautiful creatures head on. Since my self worth was clearer in my head and my heart, I wasn't necessaritly approaching them to dance. I started to find nuance in my tango social life. There were women that I liked to dance with. There were women that I was attracted to and would like to date. And there were women that I would like to be friends with. That nuance further augmented my confidence in dance because a tanda's job became to find out how I would like to categorize a person. At times, anxiety went down to near zero.

---

Milongas drained my energy for a full day the next day rendering me unproductive and feeling miserable. At times, they made me question why I was doing what I was doing. I was not willing to ruin a full next day in order to enjoy an hour of dancing the night before. I needed to find a way to address this challenge.

---

- For mantras appendix: General Tango Mantra: my self worth does not come from how well I dance. My self worth comes from my humanity: the multitude of ways in which I impact the lives of the people around me. How I actively take care of my well being and my happiness. How I acknoledge my ego and accomplished enough wins to please it.
- Ejoy your own dance, is most important. Refer to bear note.
