---
layout: page
title: "Chapter Two"
created: 2025-06-20
updated: 2025-06-20
version: 0.3.1
categories: tango
tags: hidden
---

<style>
  .new-sub-section {
    font-size: 1.3em;
  }
</style>


# Embodying a Dancer

<span class="new-sub-section">How does one go about becoming a dancer?</span> I started to answer that question by observing the dance floor and try to extrapolate the charactaristics of the people the danced from th ones that were merely going with the motions. My idea was to find those charactaristics and the put a plan where xi would tackle my finding from easiest to hardest. That would have been standard operation Nash. Break a problem down into its simplest parts and start attacking them one by one until i've attacked the whole. But something didn't feel right about that. I didn't feel like tango could be broken down like an engineering problem and I also felt like my mind was plotting something that I couldn't see clearly. Around that time, I seredepadously heard a talk by Oliver Burkeman, author of Four Thousand Weeks that made it all obvious. Burkeman says that the reason that habit building or elaborate learning systems get in our way is because the change we’re contemplating is actually rather scary or uncomfortable and treating it as a long-term incremental project is a convenient way to push the difficult stuff to another time. Wow. I never considered that my way of approaching problems which was perfect for some parts of my life, could act as a delay mechanism for the things that I was afraid of. I started to look deeper into this hammer of mine to see what else I was using it on and another insight became clear. I loved breaking problems down and creating systems to solve them because they also made me feel in control. Like I could take whatever challenge was in front of me and with some creative planning establish a process to overcome it. Burkman exposes this perfectly: "We want to see ourselves as the captain of the super yacht of our lives standing confidently on the bridge steering our life towards the future in which we will finally feel adequate and on top of things. Devising schemes for self improvement can really feed into that fantasy because you get to mentally project into the future all details all the nuts and bolts of how you’re going to get to that perfect future place. Where by contrast when you just do something with no promises about the future; when you just write a few paragraphs of your novel or sit and meditate for one session or suggest one meet up with a friend or go for one run, that requires the surrender of control because that’s not about steering the super yacht. That’s about launching your little canoe directly onto the rapids of reality and letting life take you wherever it’s going to take you." That talk exposed fundamental blindspots in how I was aproaching my tango for years. It was time to try something different.

It was the simplest thing ever. All I had to do was reverse how I did things. Instead of observing and planning and solving, I just had to dance. Dance a lot. And whenever I faced any challenges, I could decide if these were ones that I wanted to work on or whether I could live with them and still enjoy my dance. Whenever I went back home I journaled abount my experience with each dancer and about the milongqa in general. I wqanted to gain insights about how I was behaving. Namely, what was my mind thinking and how did my body feel. I set out to do this in ordre to understand what was it that made me anxious in sonme dances and what was it that made me enjoy myself in others. The hope here was that if I understood my behavir better, I'd be able to get more of the dances that felt good. I felt like I was a bug studying itself under a microscope so I called that period in my debelopment as a dancwer a Bug Called Nash.

---

<span class="new-sub-section">The first thing I needed to understand and address before I could dance a lot</span> was the force that kept me seated. My fear of rejection. It could prove to be the thing that would keep me hiding in my comfort zone of lifetime learning and planning. I didn't want that. At least I was sure of that fact.

One night, I sat out a whole milonga without asking for any dances from anyone. It felt like there was an almost palpable entity inside me preventing me from asking for them. That night was the epitome of my fear of rejection and it was to serve as the perfect specimen to help me understand what was going on inside of me. I went home and I started writing. As I dug deeper into the composition of my fear of rejection I realized that it wasn't rejection that I was afraid of. It was acceptance. I was afraid of dancers accepting my invite, but I was using rejection as an excuse to keep me seated. Here's what it means in tango when someone says yes to my invite: my first responsibility is protecting my partner from other dancers that could be bouncing into her from all directions. In milongas there are almost always beginners that don't know how to navigate the floor and experienced dancers that know how to navigate, but don't respect the code. There's also the embrace. It's a subtle act of balance: I cannot embrace her too tightly or she'll be uncomfortable, too loosely and she'll be lost. I must embrace her within the goldylocks range where I have clear demarcated boundaries that communicate the notion of don't worry, there's someone in charge at the helm, but also of the tenderness of holding a baby. I will have to maintain this embrace and multiple variations of it (because it's different for every partner I dance with) throughout the tanda. Add to the body guard role and the delicate embrace the rich and deep world of tango music. A genre so deep that it stands on its own without the dance. If I were to follow the advice of good dancers, I would have to somehow magically convert my body to a musical instruments and express myself through it. I need to transmit this musicality to my partner in a way that she could understand it or we'll be stepping on each other's feet. I added to these all the subconcious muck that I'm not even aware of and reached the conclusion that I was afraid of the responsibility, not the rejection. After my enlightenment, I felt the palpable entity that sat in my chest and caused my inhibition disappear. I believe that was because my mind knew that it could handle responsibility and once it became aware that that was the cause of my inhibition, it let go. Since that point on I barely sat at milongas. Whenver I arrived at one, I looked for someone that I felt like I would like to dance with and went straight for them. If I didn't find someone specific, I asked people from the nearest table and then the next until I had my fill for the night. In some dances I felt anxious and in others I felt joy. It didn't matter. I was dancing and I finally started the journey that would enable me to face fresh challenges.

As the fear of rejection dwindled the number of rejections increased, but suprisingly that had little effect on me. It was like asking someone 'is this the line for the icecream?' and them responding 'no, this is the line for chocolate, icecream is over there' and I simply proceeded to get my icecream. I was embarrased with my self at how insignificant it felt because just a short time ago it immobilized me in my seat for hours. The fear felt like it was part of my character and that there was nothing to do about it. I was expecting a bigger fight, but understanding lead to peace. When I saw these rejections with equanimity it became clear that they are part of becoming a dancer. In fact rejection is part of any type of activity that changes your current behaviour. I was rejected by a dozen companies before I got an engineering job. I was rejected by several women before I had found my girlfriend. I was rejected by many leads before I found my business its first customer. Every one of those rejections felt different than the other, resulted in different reactions, and required a different set of tools to deal with them. What was common was that when I learned how deal with them, they moved out of the way. They still felt unpleasant, but they were not blocking anymore. In tango, what makes rejection unique is that it happens more often and you get to see the person that rejected you regularly. So you must deal with it accordingly. One night I was sitting at a table with a few seasoned dancers and xi took the opportunity to ask them how they dealt with rejection. "One night at la catedral, I saw this beautiful woman sitting close to our table so xi went up and askeed her for a dance. She declined. She had no idea who I was. A little while later, the organixer of the milonga came over to say helljo and he happened to know her. So he introduced us and me as the 2018 world champion. Her eye bulged out and this time she asked me for a dance. I agreed and during the tanda I used every single move in my inventory to give her a taste of what she was missing. She was blown away and the smile on her face linked her two ears together. Later during the night she kept cabaceoing me and I kept pretending that I wasnt seeing her. Eventually she sent over her friend to ask me to dance with her and I told him, thanks, but no thanks. That will show her. That was more than 10 years ago and I still see her at milongas and I still decline her invites." Then every one at the table started recounting similar revenge stories. I was expecting the pros to share their tools with me, however it seemed like none of them have figuired this piece out. That discussion  made me proud because even though my interlocutors surpassed me technically I felt like I was ahead psychologically. I could deal with rejections much better.  For me, the more people said no to my invite, the more their collective faces blurred into a forgetfull memory. My focus went to the women that said yes (which where more numerous) and I worked hard to remember how each made me feel and if I would like to dance with them again and if so, to which orquestra. From then on, I always reponded to rejections with a big smile and said "it's OK, thank you" (saying no is not easy). I also kept myself open to cabaceos or invites from women that had said no in the past.
The bug named Nash could now live happily with rejection.

---

<span class="new-sub-section">Although I was staying longer at milongas and dancing a lot more</span>, there was an underlying anxiety that never left me. I became aware of it one afternoon when I could not get myself to maintain eye contact with people. I would try to look at someone to ask them to dance, but my gaze would automatically divert away to the side. And my mind was streaming with a plethora of thoughts that I couldn't discern. When I saw that in my self, I realized that I had seen this in many dancers before. Flashes of women putting on their dance shoes with shaky hands and men looking at the ground unable to look forward came to mind. What keeps us coming back, I wondered. What's the matter with us? Finding myself in that state, I brought my awareness to my breath and started to take deeper inhales and exhales. My mind seemed like it did not want to admit that it was anxious and was reacting by generating even more noise. However, as I stayed more with my breath elongating my inhales and exhales my mind slowed down and my thoughts became more legible. I could clearly see what's occupying it. "Are people looking at me?", "Who's here today?", "I don't want to dance, what am I doing here?", "Are there any good dancers?", "I want to go home and watch a film." There was nothing much for me to do other than stay with my breath and wait for my mind to see what was going on right in front of it without its creative additions. Nostalgic tango music, big smiles on the dance floor and people embracing each other. From then on, I made this my first ritual on arrival to a milonga: before changing into my dance shoes, I connected with my breath and stayed with it long enough until my mind moved out of the way. I did this even at familiar milongas full of friends and ordained it The Milonga Ritual.

It seemed like the firsts in every milonga generated their share of anxiety. The first few minutes on arrival was one thing, but getting into the first embrace of the night had its own kind of anxiety. As soon as I got into it, I could feel my heart race and sometimes, depending on who I was dacing with, my knees weaken. It would take a tanda and sometimes a few  before these effects dissipated. This was frustrating me because I didn't want to spend an hour every night until I started to enjoy my dancing. During that hour I might have danced with dancers whom I enjoyed, but due to my anxiety, I wouldn't have been able to be relaxed and creative. Could I also bring my attention to my breath to help me ease this tension? I discovered a similar way to help ease my body into the flow of dancing that had to do with the fact that when in an embrace, we are no longer alone. All the work we do is in the couple. This is not limited to movement, but also to how we are feeling and how we are breathing. So I experimented with looking for the breath of my partner and as soon as I detected it, I tried to synchronize my breath to hers. Once I felt like we were in sync then I could use her relaxed breath to relax mine and if I felt tension in hers, then I worked on slowing the both of us down. My mind relaxed in both instances because in the former it used the help of my partner and in the latter it learned that we were both in the in the same situation. Here's an entry from my journal describing this process on the first night that I tried it: "I asked a beautiful dancer up for a dance and as we got into our embrace she surprised me by going deep. Her chest was completely glued to mine and her arm wrapped around my back with her hand on the back of my neck. I could immediately tell that she knew how dance well because even at that closeness she had her own axis. I got intimidated. I felt my heart spike up and my legs shake. And I knew that she could sense both of these things which just worsened the shaking. Thankfully, I had been thinking of minimizing my first dance anxiety so I immidiately started to apply my theory of synchronizing our breaths. Instead of starting to dance, I started to look for any signs of her breath or pulse and I found it easily because we were practically glued together. Her breathing told me that she was totally relaxed and in her element so I started to slow mine down to mirror hers until I felt like she was now sharing her confidence with me. She was going to have a good time if not in movement then at least in an embrace that made her feel connected. Only then I started to dance. I was right, she danced superbly and with less tension I enjoyed the dance and my creativity suddenly started to flow out of my subconcious. I found myself doing things outside of my usual movements. At the start of every song with her I felt the same racing heartbeat come back accompanied with my shaky knees, but then I recovered my composure looking for her breath again. This is working." I called this ritual The Embrace Ritual and I started doing it at all times regardless of how I was feeling.

I overcame my fear of rejection, milonga anxiety and first dance anxiety very differently than how I would have done it. The flow of information was directly from the dance floor and the solutions where experiments in the dance floor. I wasn't hiding in my planning or lessons or practice anymore. I was still doing these things, but not as a way to delay what I was afraid of rather as tools to improve areas in which I needed to grow.

---

As I became more relaxed with the beginnings, I was getting more into the middle. The dance itself. Here it wasn't anxiety that robbed me of pleasure, it was thoughts. The overarching thought pattern was boredom prevention. If at any point in the dance I felt like I was being repetitive or my partner was being distracted, my mind wanted to take over the show. It did so in the form of a chariographer. It wanted pull new moves from my repetoir by looking up past classes and thinking of new combinations. And as it did so, my body shoulders tensed up and I usually lost the dance. When I was thinking of steps, I wasn't listening to the music and I wasn't paying attention to my partner. My concious mind only had the ability to focus on one thing at a time. At first I thought that the music was my savior. That all I had to do was constantly bring my awareness back to the music and that worked at times, but it didn't feel like I was on the right path. I asked Pepa, a tango musicality teacher about this and she said that no, even though the music is the driver leading the couple, the mind's occupatioin must not be on the music. Rather, it must be in the couple. She said pay attention to your partner and to the both of you as a couple, that's the only place your attentions should be. I was bewildered by this so I asked another teacher that frequents a milonga of mine about where his focus is when dancing. In his own words "when I'm dancing, my body is flowing with the music, with the usual patterns that we always here in tango, but then at a certain moment, my body tells me that there's something different coming, like a syncaption (a division of a beat into two shorter successive beats) or a switch in timing from marcato in two to marcato in four (when the orquestra emphasises all the beats), it's a feeling in my body, not a mental anticipation. And as soon as I feel this, I express it with the relevant movement." Hearing this from seasoned teachers and experts helped me understand the couple dynamic even more. On the dance floor (unlike the practice floor) all thoughts and energy go towards the couple. What does this mean in practice? I invented the concept of unity, being one with someone and I first thought of it as this mystical thing that one chases night after night and that one is lucky to find even once a week. But as I was having these discussions and formulating my thoughts about them Lucia Barancas in a group class said something that shed light on my questions. She said, "the diffedrent between an amazing heavenly dance and a bad one is one centimeter. If your shoulder is one centimetert from where it's supposed to be it's a bad dance. If your foot is one centimeter too far or too close, it's not a magical dance anymore." Hearing this was liberating. I knew for a fact that there is no way, I was going to get this centimeter correctly by thinking about it. I can't possibly pickup a new dancer and hit the centimeter. I started to see why seasoned dancers chace the dream dance. It's because there is probably one dancer in a hundred that has a body that is compatible to yours and a level of dancing that is comparable to yours and that happnes to be in the same milonga that you are at. I was relived to hear this because I also knew, just like musicality, that on the dance floor, I shouldn't be lookng for the centimeter, but on the practice floor that should be one of my focus points. The more I'm learning the more I'm realizing that I need to do less on the dance floor and that the dance floor is not a place to think about technique and steps. All this was logical for my brain to understand, but the emotional component that sought boredome prevention would still put my mind in tension. Summoning this logic alone while dancing was not enough to put my mind at ease and trying to psychoanalize each thought that distracted me was a goose chase that I could never win. My mind's creativity shines when it comes to reasons I should stay home behind my computer or TV. What it needed was a point of focus and I chose the couple's breath as that point. I could rely on my body to express the music as it saw fit, but my mind needed to stay focused on the couple's lifeline. The beauty of that point of focus is that it's a shared and dynamic entity that demands more focus than coming up with some step or trying to anticipate a musical pattern. It's enough to get the attention of two minds. I was starting to get to the true essence of tango. Whereas before, technique, steps and musicality where what was interesting, now it's unity. Dispelled of its mystical attributions, what it boiled down to on the dance floor was mind focused on the couple's breath as its default home, when it wasn't occupied with navigation and milonga administration. As for musicality, steps and their technique that came from the subconcious and the body and these are built in the practice room. For them to appear on the dance floor, all I had to do was learn how to be relaxed.

---

* tango does not have a goal nor an end. Tango evolves. A book on the other hand does.
* a whole section on criticism and how it affects you and how it throws you off balance and how to regain your balance.
* remember the concept of we need to remove rather than add to become courageous. Look this up in the 100 dances note.
