---
layout: page
title: "Chapter Three"
created: 2025-09-08
updated: 2025-09-30
version: 0.3.0
categories: tango
tags: hidden
---

<style>
  .new-sub-section {
    font-size: 1.3em;
  }
</style>

_This chapter is 80% complete. After going deep into musicality for a couple of months, I realized that I'm either doing it wrong or I'm thinking about it incorrectly or I don't have the right instruction. I'll complete it when I figure things out and when I feel like my dance has become musical._

# Becoming Musical

<span class="new-sub-section">Somewhere around the mid 90s</span>, when we lived in Ghana, my dad drove us to go play polo at The Shangri-La, the trendiest country club of the time. He was playing a popular song by the Egyptian virtuoso Mohamed Abdel Wahab on the radio of our beat up 1990 Peugeot 505, the antithesis of what The Shagri-La represented. My brothers, with their mouths transformed into megaphones, were blasting the lyrics and humming the tune in full stereo directly behind my head. Pulling that decades old image back into the present, I could still see how the music entered their ears and possessed them. They were not with us in the car; they were transported by the music and the singer's voice to another place. I remembered my annoyance building up because the music felt like a jackhammer pounding on the surface of my eardrums refusing to let it anywhere near my soul. I turned around from the front seat to face the twins and screamed the lyrics: "SHUT THE FUCK UP!" My dad then screamed at me "They are entranced by the music, don't break their spell." and flicked my head to make sure that his words entered deeper beyond my eardrums. About 10 years later when the three of us lived together in the same house, I started getting into independent movies and happened to watch The Visitor (2007). Richard Jenkins' character inspired me to pickup drumming. So I bought a Djembe (West African drum) with the intention that some day soon I could join drum circles where I could freely drum my way into creating collabortive music. A few months into my training my brother's friend saw the drum in our living room and asked me to play something. I placed the drum between my legs and played a few patterns that I had been practicing that week. When I finished, he looked straight at me and said "Hm". Him and his wife exchanged glances and it looked as if he silently told her "What the fuck was that?" and her responding "No clue." He then asked my brother to give it a try and to our surprise he played some impressive beats that got us all moving in our seats. Jad had never touched my Djembe before in his life. His only training was going to a nighclub on weekends where his favorite orchestra played. At that point I started to get the sense that maybe it took talent for someone to be musical. I didn't like how that thought made me feel because it went against a fundamental belief of mine that one can get pretty far at anything if they put their energy into it. About 10 years later when I moved to Buenos Aires I went to a milonga to watch Porteños dance to songs that they had been listening to since they were in their cribs. Di Sarli was playing and an acquaintance of mine commented in my ear "I used to hate Di Sarli because my grandpa hit me with a cane during our tango lessons if I didn't step correctly to the orchestra's beat." I reacted with the appropriate facial expression, but deep down I wished that my grandpa too forced me to dance to Di Sarli and hit me with a cane when I misstepped. If he had, would I have developed a musical ear? What kind of dancer would I have become? Like Martìn probably. Elegant and free. But the reality was different. I struggled to let go and let the music in.


If I didn't have a musical ear and if musicality is the crucial ingredient that made a dancer a dancer, then what chance did I have at this project of mine? Had I overcome my psychological hurdles to face a genetic limitation? Should I have accepted this and stayed in tango without attempting to improve? I decided to ignore these questions and proceed as if musicality is something I could pick up. Though, deep down, I could feel a sliver of doubt. I sat at a milonga not dancing, just observing the most musical dancers. It was easy to spot them: I filtered out the couples that were distracted and the ones that were showing off. What was left were the couples that danced. What made them different than the others, I wondered. Instead of looking at their feet I started to look at their embraces. Then at their faces. They had the same look on their faces that my brothers had more than twenty years ago in the backseat of the peauget 504. The leader and the follower shared a look of rapture. They were barely with us; just enough to avoid running into other dancers. Like Sufi dervishes they were not dancing to the music, rather they were being danced by the music.

---

<span class="new-sub-section">I wanted to experiment with rapture</span> myself and I wanted to try it immediately. At that time, I was reading Useful Not True, by Derek Sivers where he says "Your outside doesn't need to match your inside. You can feel terrified inside, but just pretend to be brave for one minute. By doing that, you were actually brave. You might be a total introvert, but need to attend an event, so you act social for one hour. By pretending to be social, you were." That gave me the ridiculous idea of faking a face of rapture while dancing for a whole night to see what came out of it. As soon I got into the embrace, I performed my embrace ritual, as had become my habit, but added a fake face of rapture and lip-synced the music. I was imitating the faces of musical dancers that were around me. It was a combination of a slight smile with forrowing and relaxing the brow to the music: I forrowed and smiled more on the high beats and less on the low beats and proceeded to dance as I usually did. The strange thing was that it started to work. Faking a face of rapture actually put me in rapture. When I succeded at doing this for most of the tanda, I started to notice that some dancers hugged me an extra hug after we finished dancing. A gesture of thanks for showing them a good time. What's even stranger is that when I faked rapture the dance felt better. Four songs passed in what felt like less than a minute. But I'm faking, how could this be? (At that point, I started to understand why women faked orgasims and I stopped getting annoyed by it). I knew that I was onto something and I wanted to understand it so it's part of my tango. Several weeks into fake rapture and what I came to realize was that my contorted face was telling the music that it had permission to do whatever it wanted with me. Contorting my face was only one of those things. It had permission to make technical mistakes with my body. It had permission to bore me and my partner. It had permission to bounce me into other couples. But it also had permission to show itself off through me, to delight my partner and to perform for the folks looking at us. To be danced by the music, I had to surrender. I experimented actively with surrender by pledging to do it after I've connected with my partner's embrace and as I did so rapture started to happen without me having to fake it. I would get into the embrace perform my rituals and then I would make a pledge to surrender.

As fullfilling as it felt, I knew that getting into that mystical state was not enough. Without the right musical technique I was risking subduing a basic element of dance which is to play. If I was going to enjoy my rapture with my partner, play had to be at the center of it. I had only achieved part of becoming musical, but there were other parts as important as rapture left.

---

My idea of being musical was to be able to embody different musical suggestions and instruments from the orchestra at different times. When I watched a musical couple dancing I knew they were musical because they seemed to be able to anticipate different parts of the music before they manifested. The leader prepares a step before the piano plays a small solo and right when the piano starts, he lead an expression of it with his body. The follower seemed to know exactly when the violin was about to start playing and she would sway within the embrace embodying its sound. The leader would perform a musical play with his feat that seemed to move at the speed of light, then returning to a position from which he could continue his step before the conductor ordered him to change course. In trying not to over study this, I have attempted to do similar things on the dance floor myself. I found it to be nearly impossible to anticipate any kind of musical ornament. Every time something different happened to the music it was too late for me to do anything with it. I started to suspect that all these musical dancers were able to be so musical because they knew the songs well. That they had been listening to them since their early years and here I am trying to do the same as they were doing with just a few years of exposure to tango. Since my pragmatic approach failed me, I put a plan in place to figure this out. Part one was about understanding tango music. I signed up for a theoratical tango musicality course, a hands on course and read the popular books on the subject. My days consisted of a couple of hours of theory, an hour of practical work and then some reading. At the end of that period, I came out with a better understanding of the rhythm, melody, counter melody, bridges, musical phrases, and syncopations. In part two of my plan, I listened to a lot of tango music. I listened to playlists grouped by different characteristics like (continue from here)  When I listened to a song, I could tell when a syncopation happened and sometimes what kind of syncopation it was. I could more easily identify the start and end of a musical phrase.I could tell if a song was a tango, milonga or vals and even sometimes identify the orchestra and the period of the song. 

I started a regular habit of listening to tangos in order to train my ear. As the weeks went by I noticed that I started to get tired of tango music. Trying to listen to it would make me shut down. And  worse, if a song I had been studying were to play at a milonga, it would trip up my dancing because my mind was trying to anticipate its different components so it could dance them. This idea was leading nowhere and it was time for me to ask for help.

I started by asking my teachers to refoucus my lessons on musicality. To let the music drive our curriculum. I also started learning from books and various courses about tango musicality targeted for dancers. I stayed on this course for a couple of months and all that happened was that my theratical knowlege increased, but my dance hadn't changed much musically. I learned about musical bridges, different types of syncopations, and variations in marcato, but I couldn't dance them. My teachers tried their best, but something was blocking me and they couldn't tell me what was blocking and I couldn't figuer it out on my own. Until one afternoon a friend of mine forwarded a social media post of a teacher that said something that felt like it could be hitting the root of the issue that was blocking me. I started looking at his writing and almost all of it resonated with my struggles in tango. It seemed as if this guy had some insights that could help nudge me forward. After some back and forth I was able to book classes with him. On the first class I explained all my musical troubles to him and he suggested we dance a few songs. That's all he needed to diagnose my months long strugge. He said "The reason that you don't feel musical is because you are not allowing the music to enter into your body." I internally rolled my eyes and was starting to feel disappointment flooding in. At that point in my journey, whenever a teacher invoked metaphors or imagery, I saw it as a smell. It's indicating that they don't understand deeply what they are talking about because if they did, they could point out exactly what you needed to change in your body to create certain effects. He then proceeded to say "I noticed that you paused in our dance whenever the music suggested a pause, but you were copying a form of pausing, you were not actually pausing." He then elaborated "There's a difference between imitating a form and actually embodying it. You are imitating it because all your pauses were transmitting the same information. They were all the same, while the music was suggesting different things. You have an idea of what a pause is and you're just doing it that." I interrupted him asking about what did all that mean in my body. He countered "I'm getting there. Your pauses are still transmitting information to me, but in a suspended form instead than in movement. As long as you are transmiting information, you cannot receive information. What we need to work on is to teach your body to turn off information transmission completely in your dance so that later, we can modulate to the proper amount." At that point, I was starting to get excited for the simple fact that what he was saying made sense. But the ultimate test is trying this out to see if it actually made a difference. "I need you to dance as you usually would, but at moments of pauses, I want you to release your breath and relax every muscle in your body. Exert barely enough energy to stay standing. Then just wait for whatever movement your brain suggests and do that. Then repeat." Just after the first try, I discovered something new in my dance. I was a busy dancer. Constantly doing things and never seazing to move. Even when I thought I was pausing, I was giving out a lot information to my partner: keep your hips in tension, your torso suspended in the air, and keep moving slightly mirroring my lead. Constantly something. With all that activity, there was no way to let the music make any suggestions. In all my years of tango practice I had never been with a teacher that worked up from the such basic fundementals. I thought fundementals started with technique and posture, but this teacher seems to have gone deeper than that. From then on, I started to practice with completely turning off information transmission in my body while dancing to teach it that there is another way to dance. The idea was that after my body understood this that when I danced outside of practice, my dance would change from a mode of constant movement to a modulated movement with peaks and throughs. The throughs was were the music entered and my body did things with it.

_As of now, I don't feel like I have accomplished this. I Will come back here for an update when I feel like I did._

---

