---
layout: page
title: "Chapter Four"
created: 2025-11-07
updated: 2025-11-07
version: 0.1.0
categories: tango
tags: hidden
---

<style>
  .new-sub-section {
    font-size: 1.3em;
  }
</style>

# Technique Will Set You Free

Technique is the most annoying thing to learn in tango. The dance as it is heavily disorganized. There are more than a dozen schools of thought about how it should be taught. Some folks teach you steps, other folks teach you elements that you can mix into steps, you could be with teachers for years and you might not get instructions in musicality. Many of the teachers have been taught by their teachers or by mixing a bunch of instruction from multiple teachers that they had and are simply transmitting information to you. There is no one single academy or one single source that builds you up from the fundementals. Some teafchers are only foucsed on one type of movement and think it's the fountain of tango, others roll their eyes at that notion. Most teachers are disorganized without an inkling of how to build one up. Technique instruction itself is hard. Finding a good teacher that understand body dynamics and biomechanics is hard. There is no standard as in ballet. Agreement is hard to come by. This is the instruction side. The elarning side the reception of this information even if it is good information is extremely difficult. Your teacher needs to be able to explain it to you, show it to you in your own body and then give you ideas about in which contexts you can use it. If you were able to check all these items off, then you need to apply it to your dance. Applying to your dance is super hard because improving a technical aspect in your movement will affect a big percentage of your movement. So every single thing you know is regressed. It goes into a downsloap until it you are able to exceed where you used to be before. So you have to work with your confidence to bare with you until you're back in your dance to where you used to be. Many times you probably misunderstood your teacher after trying out what he taught you in the field and you have to go back and discuss the adjustment with him to see if it has taken effect then to find out that what he is teaching you is wrong, because the person that taught him was taught that way which is wrong when it came to biomechanics, so all these weeks of practice and you regressed back to where you started. You ruined your dance for weeks thinking that you're going to improve afterwards until you find out that no, you simply just regressed you did part one only. Fuck.

Yet, technique will be the best investment you've ever accomplished in your dance. The difference between a good dancer and a great dancer is 1 centimer. A great dancer will utilize space in a way that is the most efficient and the most elegant. A good dancer will make it work.

My technique story began when I found a teacher that taught me things that worked. I integrated his teachings because they made sense, but then I learned that they bothered my followers. They work, I could pivot a person, but I hurt her shoulder while doing it. He never told me that it works, though I'm going to hurt my followers. I still clearly rememeber the night I came back from BA to Houston to show off my new moves how dancers would walk off the dance floor rotation the arms in the air while touching their shoulders. I was like fuck, I just spent three weeks in buenos aires for nothing. I was at the source, at the mecca with the oracle of delphi herself and yet this is the result I get. What am I to do with this? It sucks.

I had to develop a litmus test. It was in the form of a movement that I knew to perform really well, that is hard to teach that is full of subtle technique. I ask a teacher to show me how I can perform it and I keep performing it incorrectly on purpose in order to see how they would correct me. I know what I'm doing wrong so I have an idea of what it is they would recommend to me. Based on that I knew whether a teacher had good technique or not.a Sometimes I went it with a movement that I really didn't know how to do and a lot of teachers (The technique litmus test can be the start of this chapter). EVen with that test, what I found out is that some teachers are strong in some movements, but not others. It's crazy. So your tango journey will involve a lot of teacher shopping. For fundemental technique you might to Juan, for being cool at a milonga you would go to Felix, for killer embrace you would go with Tracy and for a amazing walk you could go with Javier (maybe made these names rhym with movements). For movement and their structure you might go with Frank and for how to combine movements you might go with Suzy. Don't make the mistake and think that one teacher will be able to cover all your tango. You will need multiple teachers. You will outgrow teachers. The best case scenario is to know wher eyou're stuck and then scout for the teacher that you think can nudge you out of your stuckness.

Because of the complexity of tango, you will definitely have developed bad technique. There's a guarantee that you will have bad technique in your body and when you finally are able to remedy that, you will suffer in correcting it. If all your movements are danceable at level 9, when you fix a technique issue, your movement's dancebility will suffer. Some will drop to 3 some to 6 some 8 and some you simply cannot do anymore. 

People that used to enjoy dancing with you cannot dance with you anymore. Your bad technique was compatible with their bad technique. Now you're improbving while they're still carrying their old habits. You are not looking for new dancers  and the ones that used to like will give you the evil eye everytime you go to a milonga because you don't dance with them anymore. Improving your technique sucks. It sucks all around (maybe this wold be a good start for the chapter). As you become better and better you can dance with less and less people. It's lonely at the top. Technique will make you lose friends.

All that is worth it because now you're dancing with more elegance and more eficiency. You are learning how to manage space with your body. You are learning the difference between displace and change of position. That's the curcial point in all of tango dance. You are moving a body into space and then you are occupying that space. That's your diplacement. All movement that are not displacement are positioning. When displacement happens you probably need to do something.
