---
layout: page
title: "Chapter One"
created: 2025-05-08
updated: 2025-05-14
version: 2.0.1
categories: tango
tags: hidden
---

<style>
  .new-sub-section {
    font-size: 1.3em;
  }
</style>

# One Day I Decided that I am a Dancer

<span class="new-sub-section">Have you ever succeeded</span> at faking something for more than ten years? I had been faking dancing tango for longer than that. I only realized that when a teacher once told me "you are not dancing. What you are doing is thinking. And what you're thinking is: walk, walk, walk, do figure 'a'. Walk, walk, walk, do figure 'b'. You gotta start dancing." Then he danced a song in front of me using the most basic movements. My version felt like (and probably looked like) a penguin running after its mate. His looked like an animated violin helping the orchestra express the music with more texture. When I tried to do something closer to his version, I felt ridiculous, naked and self concious. Eventually, I summoned enough wherewithal to break into true dance, without looking like an avian charmer, and what I learned is that the journey compelled me to change into a different kind of person. It changed me into the person that you had to become in order to pursue your aspiration, whatever it may be. Becoming a dancer was secondary.

---

<span class="new-sub-section">I worked hard for more</span> than half of my life at shedding identities and I succeeded excessively. I thought that with less identities I would eventually get to the baseline of simply being a good human, free of unneceray baggage: not American, not Middle Class, not Muslim, not Programmer. Instead, I would be wordly, impartial, spiritual and interdisciplinary. I would slide in and out of domains, learn, contribute and slide out. It started working, but not like I expexted it would. Whenever I committed to an activity and it started to give me joy, I withdrew afraid of identifying with it. I continued participating, but maintained a sense of detachment. I became irate when people referred to me as an American or a Programmer. What I didn't realize until many discarded identities later was that I created an identity of no identities and I was becoming overprotective of it. A genuine agnostic, undecided on everything. What I wanted was to shed identities that I didn't actively choose in order to have space to  embody ones that I did want to become. I only did the shedding part and stopped.

These realizations were occuring to me at a milonga (a tango social) as I watched a dancer paint a Pollock on the floor with his feet. That kept me wondering about how one becomes so skilled and poetic and euphoric at the same time. I had always assumed that it was a combination of instruction, practice and devotion. But there was something more to it than that. I approached and asked him how he learned to dance like that and he said "it's instruction, practice and devotion". I told him that I had been taking classes for many years, practicing constantly and I never let go of tango and I still can't paint a Pollock on the floor. What he revealed to me next lead me on an extended  adventure in the underworld of the Buenos Aires milonga scene. He said "when I get up to dance, the first thing I do is embrace. Then, I remind myself that I'm a dancer and I start acting like one. Do I want to be a heartbroken dancer? An angry one? A hopeful one? Once I have my character, I listen to the music and let it take over me and my partner. The composer is driving my characters while I surrender completely. I never think of a figure and barely of my partner except for giving her the space to do what I want her to do." I started observing him while I let my mind process what he had just said. When he sat down in between dances, he was stoic in demeanor, barely moved and just stared straight ahead as if watching an invisible TV. But when he got up to dance, he morphed into a matador. Chest up, extreme confidence, and an embrace that could protect a family of five. Then proceeded with his art work.

After my conversation with Pollock, I realized that I needed to shift my focus from the mechanics of the dance to its spirit. I had to become a tanguero (a person that organizes his life around tango dance). But first, I had to tackle a fundamental impedement to my ambition.

---

My weakest point was that I was an introvert. I did well in classes, but as soon as the milonga started to form, my mind started plotting the fastest route to the exit. There was an invisible and stubborn pull that wanted me to leave this new place with these new people. I had to find a way to work with my introversion. My way was to add a rule that prevented me from leaving the building: "You may not leave the building until you've danced at least one tanda (a set of 3 or 4 tango songs danced together)" and over time I increased that number to five. The counter became my crutch; whenever a rule became difficult, I reset the counter to one and worked back up to five. That rule worked, but I've quickly found a way around it; I only danced with familiar people and friends. And they usally cared more about friend things than dance things—in close embrace, my mouth to their ear and theirs to mine we gossiped our brains out about anything that moved, breaking the fundamental rule of tango: never talk while dancing. I became aware of my mind's procaltivity to find the easiest path and added the following provision to my rule: "...A tanda is counted only when danced with a new person." For serveral weeks after that rule had gone into effect I had my eye out for a new person in the form of a helpless creature taking their first class and clearly wishing that anyone with a pulse would ask them for a dance. I granted them their wish and they granted me persmission to go home. Mutual salvation. It was time to add a clause to prevent these shananigans "...The new person must be intimidating to me." I was intimidated by beautiful women that dacned well (not so much by beatiful beginners). I couldn't go home unless I danced with a queen. I tensed up tremendously when adding that rule, but it occurred to me that every night when I go home, I'm guaranteed to say that I've danced with a queen. What a strange thing to be intimidated by. Nevertheless this was difficult so I leaned on my crutch and reset it back to one.

In tango good dancers will not give intermediate peasants a minute of their time. Unless they want to fuck them. Many didn't want to fuck me so I started being rejected. I had some success to lean on: I used to run home after class, but now I'm staying a couple of hours afterwards. But rejection is a phenomenon that I'm pretty sure inspired Buddha to create buddhism. How was I going to solve a multi-thousand year old problem that kept millions of men lounging in their comfort zones?

My milonga rule in its entirety at that point was: "I may not leave the building until you've danced at least one tanda. A tanda is counted only when danced with a new person that intimidates me. Increase the number of tandas weekly."

Rejection was starting to show holes in my rule, but it was a horse that got me pretty far. I used to be the guy that would run home after class, but a kind and gentle rule, made it possible for me to stay for hours into the social and helped me work my way up, at first dancing with friends, then with helpless beginners, and it got me to the front door of skilled dancers though they wouldn't it. It was time to dismount the horse, but my debt to it didn't end there. It provided me with a piece of self wisdom that changed how I think about myself; I had always assumed that I was an introvert and that when I went out of my apartment, I needed an equal or greater amount of time in it when I returned. After big events, I would spend a full day at home in bed hugging my pillows tensly listening to loud sad music [mention the band] to recover. Completely disfunctional. But now I went to a class with twenty people that don't speak my language and I stayed at milongas with a hundred more and danced and mingled with people in broken Spanish and I went home with full energy ready to repeat the whole thing the following day. How was I an introvert?  It seemed like a misdiagnosis that gave me too much cause to shelter myself more than I needed to. I started to notice that only when I went to new places I would need recovery time the following day, but if I went to a familiar place, I was fine. The revelation was that it was stress[^2] that was turning me into a pillow hugger, not introversion. This freed me from the introvert label and gave me new ways to deal with this type of problem. My primary defense against social burnout used to be to avoid new events and if I had to do them, I had to plan a day or two of recovery afterwards making my tanguero quest untenable. But now instead of avoiding milongas (or any social events), I built gardual familiarity with them. That was my key in lowering stress. Build familiarity by progressing gently and regressing kindly. Repeat until I feel like I'm at home with my people[^3].

[^2]: agoraphobia? It seems it's like new places and new people. Maybe new people more than new places.

[^3]: For one time type events, think of the place as a circle and if the center is your goal, work at the periphery meeting the most gentle people and familiarizing youreslf with the outer physical place. Even the furniture.

Rejection was hard. When it was being nice, it ruined my night. When it was being a bitch it made me doubt my self. I went down the usual route and applied every trick in every self help book: it's not me, it's them. It's a good thing in disguise. It builds resilience. All these could be true, but still, rejection was hard. I had to revisit my tanguero quest and truly understand why was it something that I wanted to do? Why does tango have so much pull on me and hadn't let me go for all these years? What was it about watching Pollock that made it OK to have to deal with the challenges it takes to paint and be free like him? Is this the time to abandon tango and move on to easier things?

It was two things that made him so appealing. First, he was there with a table full of friends that seemed to know each other for decades. They ate, they drank, they laughed, they talked and they danced until morning and then walked each other home when the band was packing their bandoneons (an accordeon like instrument). I had been an immigrant my whole life. I was born in my home country to be moved out of it to a strange nation of wild animals to be again moved out of that to a stranger nation of wild divisions and the pattern hadn't change much yet. The price of a life full of adventure comes at the expense of deep roots and to imagine myself having a regular weeknight or two where I would go to a table full of friends with my seat always reserved felt like it would satiate my yearning for deep friendships. The second appeal was as deep as good friendships: unity. Imagine that you're a painter sitting in front of a blank canvas with your lover who's also a painter sitting in your lap. You're both holding your paintbrushes and leading each others lines together. Your blue curve is followed by her yellow straight line. She's smiling a faint satisfied smile. Neither of you know where the lines are going to lead, but the only way is to let your hands be moved by something that can be only described by what it's not. It's not intention. It's not control. It's not communication. And when you're done, you won't get to look at the finished work, you only get to enjoy the process of creating it and maybe you're left with a memory of it. It's like Tibetan monks matecoulsly creating intricate sand mandalas that symbolize the universe and the interconnectedness of all things to immediately destroy them as they reach peak beauty. Even monks need to be reminded of impermanance. Yes, I want my life to include deep friendships and impermant unity.

I revisited my rule and realized that a world as rich as Argentine Tango cannot be entered with rules. It must be entered using its own language.

The first word in Argentine Tango is 'embrace'. It's the cornerstone of everything. You either give your soul up completely to your partner or you don't. There is no in between. This is not technique like where to place your hand on her back and how your elbows should touch and how to relax your shoulders and how to hold her hand and how to position your head. This is about opening up your soul. Think of the things about you that make you the most embarrased and most ashamed and imagine yourself telling them to someone you just decided to give a chance with your deepest secrets. You know that they will hear the quiver in your voice and see how you look when you feel unworthy of love. You're so close together that she can feel your heart beat communicating all these vulnerabilities and you can feel hers reacting to them. All this is happening in the first few seconds of the dance. You haven't even started yet. I only learned what the embrace meant when I moved to Argentina. One evening, my Argentine friend led me into a party and when we arrived he hugged the first person he saw—for what seemed like an enternity—then they kissed and had a quick conversation though it felt like they exchanged more than small talk. I shook that persons hand keeping a safe, American 10 foot distance. When he ran into the next person, the same thing transpired until we reached his circle of actual friends—about 14 people sitting in an actual circle—and the hugs and kisses ensued at whole different level. To my horror, they wouldn't accept my 10 foot distanced hand shake and each would pull me in for a hug and kiss. What a nightmear. I said to myself that I'm never going out again in Argentina. As the days went by, I started to see this everywhere: the barbershop next to a restaurant I frequent is regularly fronted by the owner hanging out with his son, the son's feet raised on his dad's lap, the dad's hand massaging the son's neck while they're conversing. My dad sends me a happhy new year text message on New Year Day and a happy birthday message usually one or two days after my birthday. Argentina is different. They know how to love and how to show it there. I needed to start by being comfortable with hugging and kissing and loving and showing it.

My embrace must reveal everything about me with confidence. That was my first rule-resistant challenge.

If the embrace is offering up your soul, then the Argentine Tango music is offering up your body. Dancers that have been dancing the same song since they could walk, never know how they're going to dance that song. A tango song has many layers and a dancer could pick a layer and dance it for the whole song or they could mix and match between the layers dancing different rhythms and different melodies. The leader could decide to let his partner dance small parts of the song or take full control and lead every single step. No one knows what's going to happen. To add to the combinatirial explosion of possibilities, as your musical ear improves, you'll start to hear the same song in a different way. A dancer once told me "I had been dancing to a song by Di Sarli for 14 years and these days when I hear it, I'm completely drawn to the violins. It's like all the other acompaniaments and instruments have disappeared. I never noticed the violins before. I now get excited when it's played because it's like I'm dancing to something brand new." It has more to do with the mood of that day and how the music is unfolding it than it does with decisions of how to dance. I on the other hand, plan my whole week down to the hour. My daily planner has items that read "Sleep 8 hours", "Drink coffee at 8am", "Go to the bathroom before starting work" and so on planning all my tasks until bedtime. I still remember the reaction of my first tango teacher, who lived on the 14th floor of a highrise, when I asked her "how can I write down every single step I'm going to dance so I could memorize it and dance better?" She jokingly started to look for the nearest window to jump out of. The dance is deeply structured, yet it's fundamentaly improvised. I had a hard time holding these two opposing ideas in my head at the same time. My mind thrives on predictability and structure. I needed to learn how to let go.

I must let myself be danced by the music. That was my second rule-resistant challenge.

Although I had improved a lot and I successfully pushed myself to do things that were out of my comfort zone, I still felt like I was at the periphery. At milongas, I was like a visitor that was getting good at sneaking in a few dances here and there. These thoughts were occuring to me as I was dancing with an amazingly beatiful and skilled dancer. I realized that there I was, mission accomplished, why am I still feeling like an outsider? The answer was simple. I was not a dancer. I was a person attracted to an activity and trying to navigate it with my own language and my own agenda. Not the one it required of me. Then and there I made a decision: from that moment on, I was to assume that I was a dancer. A dancer was one of my new chosen identities.
